Iran 1979.
>> A revolution against corruption,
repression, and inequality leads to the
birth of a new theocracy, the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Over the next four
decades, in the face of mounting Western
sanctions, a new military and political
class would emerge.
Because of sanctions, the Iranian regime
is in dire need of middlemen.
These folks have played a crucial role
in bypassing sanctions against Iran and
Russia.
>> Bloomberg reporting revealed how one of
these elites operating under the code
name H would go on to become a power
broker in the world's shadow economy.
His plan was to turn this business
empire into a global international
network and he was getting there.
>> What we ultimately uncovered was this
secretive network that was one of the
three biggest oil trading networks for
Iran.
>> It's difficult to put a number but it is
tens of billions of dollars.
>> We realized the network was more than
just oil. It was also part of the arms
trade. It goes much further than just
Tyrron. By the end of it, this amounted
to one of the bigger law enforcement
actions by the US in the past decade.
>> This investigation uncovers the lengths
Iran's elite would go to to consolidate
power,
even as Iranians once again call for
change.
And the world watches as the fate of the
Islamic Republic of Iran hangs in the
balance.
I'm Ben Bartinstein. I'm a senior
reporter on the energy and commodities
team.
I'm about to try one of my sources who's
an insider within the network that we've
been investigating.
We're talking about the highest levels
of government in Iran.
The source is understandably quite
scared.
You know, they want every precaution
taken to kind of hide their identity.
My name is Marzad Borujardi and I was
born in Iran. And when I first came to
the states, my goal was to become a
petroleum engineer like my father.
Iran has been a single product economy
mainly for much of its history, right
after the discovery of oil in 1908.
>> It's a discovery that will fuel an
historic rise for Iran, making it a key
country of interest for the United
States. The oil creates enormous wealth,
but it remains in the hands of a select
few. By the 1970s, the royal family are
seen to live lives of excess and an
extravagant palace filled with gold
telephones and Warhol portraits.
This is a world apart from the
workingclass neighborhood where a man
named Ali Shankani comes of age.
>> Ali Shamhani is a very very important
figure. His father was a low-level
bazaar merchant. He came from one of the
poorest part of town. He and I are both
from the same city, right?
>> At the time of the revolution, he was
like, you know, 23 years old, but he
went up the political ladder very, very
quickly.
In 1978,
what starts as a broad coalition calling
for an end to corruption and ties with
the US
becomes a revolution.
>> When there is trouble in Iran, that is
trouble for the United States. And there
is big trouble in Iran now.
>> The revolutionaries know that oil
production is key to power. They
announce an oil strike and threaten
action against anyone who defies it.
There
>> has been some violence. There has been
some individual cases with some
Americans where uh either they were
abused or people were throwing throwing
stones at them and you know things like
that.
>> They had put out a list that was pinned
to the wall in the mosque in the city
that I'm from and they were saying that
we want to assassinate these individuals
because they are breaking the strikes.
Paul Grim, 56, an American oil
executive, was ambushed and killed on
his way to work in Iran today. Three
assassins with machine guns. At the same
time, a few blocks away, an Iranian
executive, and Grim's company was
killed, too.
>> My father was a oil engineer for the
Iranian oil company. He and an American
engineer as they were each driving to
work early in the morning, they were
assassinated in in front of their their
houses.
After these assassinations, oil
production came to a total halt.
>> 40 days later, politically speaking, the
revolution succeeds.
Though the identity of the assassins is
still disputed today, one of the groups
credited with carrying out the murders
is Manserun, a clanderstein Islamist
guerrilla group. In the last days of the
revolution, they help overthrow the
monarchy. The sha leaves the country.
Ayatah returns from exile and the
Islamic Republic of Iran is born.
Mansurun endeared themselves to ayati
who came to rely on them as men of
action.
When Kumeni came back to Tehran these
folks made up part of his entourage of
bodyguards
>> and among Manserun's members is Ali
Shamani.
But soon the ideals of Manserun come
into conflict with Homminy's vision.
Many members are arrested or executed,
but others like Shamani thrive,
joining a new military force set up to
protect the new regime. It's called the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps or
IRGC.
When the Iran Iraq war started a year
after,
the government came to rely more and
more on the revolutionary guards in
terms of its military muscle and they
entrusted them with a lot of power.
Ali would go on to control Iran's navy.
It's a position which over the next four
decades allows him access to dozens of
ports and sea terminals in the Persian
Gulf, crucial for evading sanctions put
in place by the US and others.
revolutionary guards would use those
ports to bring in military armoraments
or cigarettes or whatever you know that
was hot in the black market to make a
killing. And of course, Mr. Shamhani, he
knows where all the bodies are buried,
all the tricks that the government has
learned. And I have no doubt that that
knowledge has been passed along to the
children.
My name is Miat Maliki. I was the head
of the sanctions targeting unit at OFAC,
which is an office within the Treasury
Department.
I was born and raised in Iran. I was
born in Tehran. It was a very strict
dictatorship. in one thing that I
remember is having VHS tape players were
illegal.
My dad used to bundle it up with
blankets and put it in a closet so it's
hidden and then he would bring it out
sometimes and we would we would watch
movies, Hollywood movies.
But the way that things kind of changed
post Iran Iraq war was you were either a
part of that regime inner circle and if
you were outside that
you were part of the 70 80% that were
just struggling financially, socially,
economically.
>> Although Iran's theocratic system
preaches austerity, the accumulation of
wealth is tolerated but never power.
In the 2010s, a string of wealthy
businessmen are accused of defrauding
the Iranian state and sentenced to
death. And through a quiet purge of the
private sector, businesses are seized or
sold off to the children of ministers,
generals, or clerics.
The regime learned they need to rely on
folks that they can actually trust and
who is better than family members of key
regime officials.
You end up with family members to take
over very lucrative sectors, oil,
petroleum, petrochemical metal sectors,
the natural resources that that exists
in Iran.
This nepatism is so widespread a new
term is coined agazade or children of
the elite. Most go under the radar. But
in 2008,
>> Ali Shamani decides to introduce one of
his sons on national television.
Hussein Shamhan is Ali Shamhan's son. He
looked very sharp and somehow shy.
I remember that TV host asked him, "So,
you didn't find him a job in the
government?
I remember trying to understand
what he was doing.
It's not like a startup. It's not like
he's opening a clothing line. It was
very clear to me when he said he's in
the private sector being the son of Ali
Sham Khani. He's probably sitting on top
of some huge economic enterprise
somewhere.
The story really began for me in early
November of 2023. I was at this event in
Dubai and I bumped into this source of
mine who was telling me about this
relatively new company that operated
from the office right next door.
The key bit that caught my attention was
this company which was quite secretive
was run by the son of a prominent IRGC
commander and they were active in
trading oil.
Coincidentally, just a few weeks prior,
a separate source had mentioned the same
exact company and how they'd ballooned
from about five employees to 200
practically overnight.
>> The company is Milivus Group. From
offices in Dubai, Switzerland, and
Romania, it openly trades in oil and
other products.
>> What struck me the most was just the
mystery around the owner.
The code names we started to hear was H
or Hector.
>> Good evening. This is Ben Bartinstein
from Bloomberg News. Some folks would
sidestep the question entirely.
>> Is it okay for me to record this
conversation? And others they didn't
even know who was the boss or they would
say, "I'm not allowed to talk about it."
There was a bit of a concern about how
powerful this individual was that they
worked for. You hear that and you just
want to understand who is this person
within the internal system. The bio page
for the top boss said H/ Hector. If an
employee were to question that, they
would get a stern talking to from HR and
be advised to never ask that type of
question again. Certainly, their secrecy
in these types of shadow networks to
begin with. Uh but this level of secrecy
was on another level.
In
>> the first few months,
>> it felt like you're banging your head
against the wall trying to get the
answer to that question.
>> The person you are trying to reach is
not available.
>> But then something changes in 2024.
Amidst stricter sanctions on Russian
oil, Milivus abruptly sheds dozens of
jobs. Okay.
>> And suddenly more sources inside the
network are willing to talk. You had
other folks now looking over their
shoulder wondering what if I'm next. You
>> sure about that?
>> Suddenly you're going from 2 weeks of
not getting any new leads to suddenly
every day there's a new breakthrough.
And after talking with several dozen
sources month after month after month,
we came to the conclusion that age could
really only be one person.
Hussein Shamani.
It's early 2022.
A cargo ship is impounded in India on
charges of possessing false documents.
It's an event that goes largely
unnoticed until a series of Iranian
reports revealed that the ship belongs
to the Admiral group owned by Hussein
and Hassan Shamhani, the sons of Ali.
>> The tanker when he was detained to
India, that's when the news really
broke. Sham Hani who for years was a
politician
and always came up as being a very
national security very loyal regime
actor all of a sudden he's involved in
petroleum trade and his son's name
started kind of floating
starting with Admiral Group the company
that owned the tanker in India. The US
Treasury begins to map out Hussein
Shamani's network.
>> Hussein's business was really picking
up. They're setting up companies. It was
growing. Slowly, our understanding of
the scope of this network grew.
The key company that he really started
out with was called Admiral Group, which
was an homage to his father's role as a
rear admiral.
After this India incident, the network
really shifted its focus to Dubai
and a new web of companies were set up
in the process with MVU really being at
the heart of it all. The list keeps
expanding by the day. Basically,
sometimes I wonder if he knows how many
companies or tankers fall under this
layers of companies, this network that
he has established. But the numbers that
we had were about 115 companies and
tankers and individuals who were part of
this network.
>> This sprawling network of companies
offers access to the world's ports and
commodities markets, making it easier to
covertly trade Iranian and Russian oil.
According to multiple sources spoken to
by Bloomberg, concealment methods are
employed throughout the network. Crude
oil is blended and rebranded to hide its
real origins. Payments are rooted
through shell companies and barrels are
transported via a dark fleet of ships.
According to the US Treasury Sanction
Office,
>> Hussein he felt very comfortable in Iran
being a son of Shiaani
that gave him a false perspective that
he can also operate freely with that
sense of power and and comfort outside
Iran. And he had set up layers and
layers of companies to get into the
formal market. And that confidence is
what was really failed him. That brought
him into a spotlight.
My name is David Tannen Bomb.
My job has been to track the dark fleet
to track how persons under sanctions
whether they are from Iran or Russia
evade those sanctions.
We've ran into Hussein Shaman since the
war started in Ukraine. The main
companies that we focus on that he runs
are Cobban Shipping and one is Ocean
Link Shipping.
We've seen them move between the
different fleets, which kind of
signifies that they're owned by the same
persons. And between them, they've
likely raised billions of dollars, most
likely on behalf of the IRGC.
So, this is one of the vessels that just
came onto station. She's pretending to
be off of Bosra, but in actuality, she's
probably meeting up with another vessel
to take on Iranian crude. They love to
do it in this area because it's close to
Iraq, and they can pretend that the
crude is Iraqi as opposed to Iranian
crude.
>> Iran is one of the most prolific users
of the dark fleet. Every day we are
adding new and new vessels.
It's always this cat and mouse game
where we're figuring out how they're
evading sanctions and then it's their
job to replace it and our job to keep up
with what they're doing.
>> Tannenbal estimates 10% of the world's
tankers are part of the dark fleet. In a
previous documentary, Bloomberg filmed
two oil tankers conducting illicit
shipto- ship transfers off the coast of
Greece. The ownership of the aging
vessels was unclear, and only one ship
appeared on global tracking systems.
Shamani's network has used similar
evasion tactics, generating tens of
billions of dollars from the sale of
Iranian and Russian oil to countries
including China and India.
>> This network that we uncovered was one
of the three biggest oil trading
networks for Iran. The moves that this
network makes which are in the billions
of dollars per year can influence the
amount that the average consumer might
pay at the pump. So really it goes much
further than just Dubai and Tyrron.
>> All the evidence points to Hussein
Shamani directing the network's
activities.
>> He was approving bank transfers. He was
explaining how the company was thinking
about highlevel hiring and firing
decisions and kind of the future of the
company at large. The documents just
added another layer of confirmation to
the fact that it was in fact H who was
calling the shots. There was a clear
authority in the messaging that this was
the top boss.
>> But in emails to Bloomberg, Hussein
Shamani denies all involvement.
It was peculiar when we sent our initial
request to Mr. Shamani. We addressed it
to Hussein Shamani/H/Hector
at Miboose Group and ultimately his
lawyer confirmed that he received that
very letter.
He didn't receive it. It was sent to him
by Middle East groups. He confirmed to
me that he needed he's not part of the
ownership nor of the management of the
Middle East group.
>> So, how do they know how to send it to
him? Then
>> they know him.
>> And could you explain that relationship?
>> How they know him? I you know that's I'm
not sure that's even relevant. His
lawyer is telling me on the phone while
agreeing to be on the record that he
knows Milus Group.
So much of this activity is in the gray
area. You can understand if you put
yourself in the shoes of Hussein Shimani
why he would feel that he's perfectly
legitimate and has every right to be an
active player in the Iranian oil market.
But of course from the US vantage point
they would say this is circumventing
sanctions. And if you were to ask a lot
of Iranians, they would pose the
question, why is this very wealthy
regime insider family profiting the most
from this trade and not the Iranian
people?
>> And it's not just about oil. A Bloomberg
investigation has found that parts of
Shaman's network, including a company
called Cryos Shipping, could be dealing
with a different deadly cargo.
>> We realized the network was more than
just oil. It was also part of the arms
trade.
Something that has become increasingly
prevalent for countries navigating
sanctions which include Iran and Russia
is that you know it's increasingly
difficult for them to transact in the US
dollar. So as a result they must turn
often times to barter trades.
When it came to the Russia relationship
in particular, that involved this
network actually shipping weapons and
other drone related parts across the
Caspian Sea and getting paid back in
oil.
There are two things that Russia needs
to make the war happen. The first is to
sell oil to get the money to fund this
and the second is to get what they call
dual use goods. These are microchips,
their infrared sensors, their
gyroscopes, all the different components
that go into build say the missile that
they use to attack Ukraine. A network
like this is one of those perfect
synergies that Iran can sell its oil and
at the same time it can transfer weapons
to Russia for profit.
If you want to turn $1 billion into 10
billion practically overnight, the key
ingredient is leverage. And for that,
you need Western banks. Probably one of
the bigger surprises was how much
Western financial exposure there was to
this network.
The oil handled by Shamani's network
even reached major global players like
BP and Chevron. According to multiple
sources and Millibus' own sales material
and some companies in the network had
ties to the world's biggest banks.
>> We're talking BP, we're talking Chevron,
other major Western companies. When we
looked at their banking relationships,
they had relationships with Standard
Chartered, JP Morgan, other major US,
UK, and European financial institutions.
You know, it says quite something about
the impressive nature of how this
network was able to camouflage
themselves.
One way to access these western
financial institutions was through the
use of hedge funds. With offices in
London, Geneva, and Dubai, and funding
from lenders such as JP Morgan, Ocean
Leonid would prove to be a vital cog in
the Shamani empire.
>> Ocean Leonid was presented as the key
hedge fund for this network. Basically
they were leveraging the proceeds from
some of the oil trades conducted out of
Dubai. Those funds some of them were
getting funneled to their offices in
London and Geneva and then they were
trading the the proceeds some of them in
the commodity space some of them in
other assets but the goal was really to
take this pot of oil proceeds and make
it many multiples of that. Sources
connected to Shamani's network are
hesitant to speak out, but one former
Ocean Leoned employee makes contact.
After our story on Ocean Leonid, in a
matter of weeks, the US began
investigating the relationship between
the Western Financial Institutions and
the hedge fund. And then in short order,
the UK shut down the operations of the
hedge fund in London.
Had the hedge fund stayed operating,
this network could have kept turning out
15 to 20 billion dollars a year in oil
revenue and then turned those tens of
billions of dollars into hundreds of
billions of dollars. Of course, that
dream faded with the collapse of Ocean
Leonid.
For far too long, all the way back to
1979 to be exact,
nations have tolerated Iran's
destructive and destabilizing behavior
in the Middle East and beyond.
Those days are over.
After a gradually hardening stance, in
July 2025, the US announced the largest
Iran related sanctions since 2018. It
targets 115 entities in nearly two dozen
countries. And for the first time, the
US names Hussein Shamani.
>> I keep remembering the first time he
showed up in that TV interview with his
father.
this shy kid and then he gets into this
business empire.
It was evolutions. It was a watching
Breaking Bad. It was Walter White
becoming Heisenberg.
If you think of a ideal scenario to
uplift the livelihoods of the average
Iranian, it would be one in which the
oil industry can really support uh the
average Iranian. Instead, the reality is
that just a few families really profit
from this industry, one of which being
the Shankani family.
As the biggest and deadliest
anti-government protest since 1979
erupted in Iran this year, some called
for a return of the Sha's son.
It is ironic to see how a revolution
that was carried out in the name of
justice, equity, etc. against what was
considered to be Shaw's corrupt western
le type of a political system. We have
ended up at this point four decades
later at a time when the new
revolutionary elites have become even
more despised than the regime that they
overthrew in the eyes of the average
citizen because of the infringement on
rights of average citizens.
Revolutions have a dynamic of their own
and unfortunately in most revolution it
is the most brutal elements that end up
becoming the new elite.